Noam Chomsky MIT
1. Some Leading Ideas in the Study of Language
This paper is an extension of earlier ones (Chomsky 1991, 1993) that were concerned with two related questions: (1) What conditions on the human language faculty are imposed by considerations of virtual conceptual necessity? (2) To what extent is the language faculty determined by these conditions, that is, how much special structure does it have beyond them? The first question in turn has two aspects: what conditions are imposed on the language faculty by virtue of (A) its place within the array of cognitive systems of the mind/brain, and (B) general considerations of simplicity, elegance, and economy that have some independent plausibility?
Question (B) is not precise, but not without content, as in the natural sciences generally. Question (A) has an exact answer, but only parts of it can be surmised, given what is known about related cognitive systems. To the extent that the answer to question (2) is positive, language is something like a `perfect system,' meeting external constraints as well as can be done. The `minimalist' program for linguistic theory seeks to explore these possibilities.
Any progress toward this goal will deepen a problem for the biologial sciences that is already far from trivial: how can a system such as human language arise in the mind/brain, or for that matter, in the organic world, in which one seems not to find systems with anything like the basic properties of human language? That problem has sometimes been posed as a crisis for the cognitive sciences. The concerns are appropriate, but their locus is misplaced; they are a problem for biology and the brain sciences, which, as currently understood, do not provide any basis for what appear to be fairly well-established conclusions about language. Much of the broader interest of the detailed study of language lies right here, in my opinion.
The leading questions that guide the minimalist program came into view as the principles-and-parameters (P&P) model took shape. A look at recent history may be helpful in placing these questions in context; needless to say, these remarks are schematic and selective, and benefit from hindsight.
Early generative grammar faced two immediate problems: to find a way to account for the phenomena of particular languages (`descriptive adequacy'), and to explain how knowledge of these facts arises in the mind of the speaker-hearer (`explanatory adequacy'). Though it was scarcely recognized at the time, this research program revived the concerns of a rich tradition, of which perhaps the last major exponent was Otto Jespersen. Jespersen recognized that the structures of language "come into existence in the mind of a speaker" by abstraction from presented experience, yielding a "notion of structure" that is "definite enough to guide him in framing sentences of his own," crucially, ''free expressions" that are typically new to speaker and hearer. These properties of language determine the primary goals of linguistic theory: to spell out clearly this ''notion of structure" and the procedure by which it yields "free expressions,'" and to explain how it arises in the mind of the speaker the problems of descriptive and explanatory adequacy, respectively. To attain descriptive adequacy for a particular language L, the theory of L (its grammar) must characterize the state attained by the language faculty. To attain explanatory adequacy, a theory of language must characterize the initial state of the language faculty and show how it maps experience to the state attained. Jespersen held further that it is only "with regard to syntax" that we expect "that there must be something in common to all human speech"; there can be a "universal (or general) grammar," though "no one ever dreamed of a universal morphology."
In the modern period these traditional concerns were displaced in part by behaviorist currents and in part by various structuralist approaches, which radically narrowed the domain of inquiry while much expanding the data base for some future inquiry that might return to the traditional and surely valid concerns. To address them required a better understanding of the fact that language involves infinite use of finite means, in one classic formulation. Advances in the formal sciences provided that understanding, making it feasible to deal with the problems constructively. Generative grammar can be regarded